docs/adr: ADR #003 March 2022 Testnet Design for Celestia Node (#244)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: docs/adr/adr-003-march2022-testnet.md

we have a basic scaffolding and structure for a celestia node, the focus of the next engineering sprint is to continue 
refactoring and improving this structure to include more features (defined later in this document).

<hr style="border:2px solid gray"> </hr>

## Decision

## New Features

### New node type definitions
* Introduce a standalone **full** node and rename current full node implementation to **bridge** node. 
* Remove **dev** as a node type and make it a flag on every available node type.

### Introduce bad encoding fraud proofs
Bad encoding fraud proofs will be generated by **full** nodes inside of `ShareService`, upon reconstructing a block
via the sampling process. 

If fraud is detected, the **full** node will generate the proof and propagate it to the `FraudSub` gossip network. 
If no fraud is detected, _______________________@TODO_________________________?

If a fraud proof is received via `FraudSub`, **full** nodes will perform the verification themselves to check to ensure
the fraud proof is valid. 
If the fraud proof is valid, the node should immediately halt all operations.

> If it is invalid, __________________@TODO____________? (Do nothing?).

Author: cc @liamsi @Wondertan 

My idea here: doesn't libp2p have some sort of built-in peer reputation management system where you can mark a certain peer as less trustworthy than others based on "bad behaviour"? **This isn't necessary to implement for the next testnet iteration**, but I think it would be nice to tag certain peers as misbehaving if they, for any reason, propagate incorrect bad encoding proofs to the network since the behaviour for a node upon receiving a valid fraud proof is to halt all operations.

Reviewer: > My idea here: doesn't libp2p have some sort of built-in peer reputation management system where you can mark a certain peer as less trustworthy than others based on "bad behaviour"? 

Gossipsub (v1.1) has something in this direction but I am not very familiar with the details yet:
https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.1.md#peer-scoring

had previously created for BlockService called `BlockFetcher`), and we had to do this last minute b/c it wouldn’t work 
otherwise, leading to a bunch of hacks and other issues (like having to hand the celestia full node a “trusted” hash of
a header from the already-running chain so that it can sync up to that point and start listening for new headers.

**Proposed new architecture**:

### `BlockService` is only responsible for reconstructing the block from Shares handed to it by the `ShareService`
Right now, the `BlockService` is in charge of fetching new blocks from the core node, erasure coding them, generating 
DAH, generating `ExtendedHeader`, broadcasting `ExtendedHeader` to `HeaderSub` network, and storing the block data 
(after some validation checks).

Instead, we should rely on ShareService sampling to fetch us *enough* shares to reconstruct the block inside of 
`BlockService`.

### `ShareService` optimizations
* Implement parallelization for retrieving shares by namespace. This
[issue](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/184) is already being worked on.

> * NMT/Shares/Namespace storage optimizations (**TODO @WONDERTAN**)

Author: @Wondertan tagging you here so you can fill in the gaps with a sentence or two (please see all `TODO @WONDERTAN` notes in the document)

Reviewer: Wouldn't the main storage optimization be that inner nodes won't get stored but recomputed instead? Or is this about other optimizations?

Reviewer 2: > Wouldn't the main storage optimization be that inner nodes won't get stored but recomputed instead?
I still don't understand how this can be implemented at all, but would like to have this implemented. Can we discuss this at some point?

Reviewer: >> Wouldn't the main storage optimization be that inner nodes won't get stored but recomputed instead?

> I still don't understand how this can be implemented at all, but would like to have this implemented. Can we discuss this at some point? @liamsi

Sure, we should discuss this at some point. We should do some napkin math to decide if we should prioritize this for launch (incl. incentivized testnet then) or not.
How it would work: you simply recompute the inner nodes on demand and only store the leaves? Why would that be impossible?

Reviewer 2: > you simply recompute the inner nodes on demand and only store the leaves?

huh? How? Try to imagine the request flow starting from data root up to leave and what the logic would look like for a responder that only has leaves.

Reviewer: > Try to imagine the request flow starting from data root up to leave and what the logic would look like for a responder that only has leaves.

Here is the naive way:

Case 1) requesting all data for a height for instance:
just return all leaves. requester can recompute everything locally and just compare against root.
Case 2) requesting one leaf (e.g. per index):
Load block of that height (all leaves), recompute the inner nodes of corresponding Merkle tree and respond with leaf + corresponding inclusion proof.
case 3) request all leaves according of one namespace:
like in 2) but return a bunch of leaves and a with the corresponding (recomputed) proof.

A less naive approach would acknowledge the fact that always loading all leaves might be undesirable as well. So what could be a middle ground? Only store _some_ inner nodes, e.g. store the tree in packages of smaller subtrees with their roots (aka some inner nodes) and only recompute the missing inner nodes when necessary. 

I think the latter is how roughly [trillian](https://github.com/google/trillian/tree/master/storage#subtrees) and [diem](https://github.com/diem/diem/tree/main/storage/jellyfish-merkle/src) handle tree storage if I understand correctly. IIRC, diem treats every 4 level binary tree as one inner node and in trillian this is configurable. Both are probably not only there to decrease storage but to optimize for IO.

Reviewer 2: Resolving it as unrelated. Extracted into #271

# ADR #003: March 2022 Testnet Celestia Node

<hr style="border:3px solid gray"> </hr>

## Authors

@renaynay @Wondertan

## Changelog

* 2021-11-25: initial draft

<hr style="border:2px solid gray"> </hr>

## Legend

### Celestia DA Network

Refers to the data availability "halo" network created around the Core network.

> ### **Bridge Node**

Author: I think not for now, but can consider later when we see a usecase where it's more convenient to run an embedded node.

> ### **Bridge Node**

Reviewer: Just for context: In reality, the actual, validator nodes most likely won't run together with node at all. Instead only [sentry nodes](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/nodes/#sentry-node) or dedicated full-nodes will do.

> ### **Bridge Node**

Reviewer 2: Ok, I see @liamsi.

A **bridge** node is a **full** node that is connected to a Celestia Core node via RPC. It receives either a remote
address from a running Core node or it can run a Core node as an embedded process, but the critical difference is that

> instead of constructing blocks via sampling the network for shares, it receives headers and blocks directly from its 

Author: it still uses the process of sampling to download the entire block, it will just be systematic rather than random correct? I think using the term sampling is still fine, since you can sample to 1. prove data is available and 2. reconstruct the entire block.

trusted Core node, validating blocks and producing `ExtendedHeader`s to broadcast to the Celestia DA network.

### **Full Node**

A **full** node is the same thing as a **light** node, but instead of performing `LightAvailability` (the process of 
DASing to verify a header is legitimate), it performs `FullAvailability` which samples the network for shares in order 

> to fully reconstruct the block and store it, serving shares to the rest of the network.

Reviewer 2: If [this](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/pull/244#discussion_r763825925) was applied than the above should be applied as well.

* Remove **dev** as a node type and make it a flag on every available node type.

### Introduce bad encoding fraud proofs
Bad encoding fraud proofs will be generated by **full** nodes inside of `ShareService`, upon reconstructing a block
via the sampling process. 

If fraud is detected, the **full** node will generate the proof and broadcast it to the `FraudSub` gossip network and
will subsequently halt all operations. If no fraud is detected, the **full** node will continue operations without 
propagating any messages to the network. Since **full** nodes reconstruct every block, they do not have to listen to 
`FraudSub` as they perform the necessary encoding checks on every block.

**Light** nodes, however, will listen to `FraudSub` for bad encoding fraud proofs. **Light** nodes will verify the 
fraud proofs against the relevant header hash to ensure that the fraud proof is valid. 
If the fraud proof is valid, the node should immediately halt all operations. If it is invalid, the node proceeds 
operations as usual. 

Eventually, we may implement a reputation tracking system for nodes who broadcast invalid fraud proofs to the network, 

> but that is for later iterations.

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22449364/144496239-a1aac548-c657-401d-a575-eb310603dc42.png)

### [Introduce an RPC structure and some basic APIs](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/169)
Implement scaffolding for RPC on all node types, such that a user can access the following methods: 

`HeaderAPI`

* `Header(_height_)` -> ExtendedHeader{}
* `Header(_hash_)` -> ExtendedHeader{}

`NodeAPI`

* `P2PInfo()` -> returns a blob of p2p info (can be broken into several subcommands, such as `net_info`)
* `Config()` -> returns the node's config
* `NodeType()` -> returns the node's type (e.g. **full** | **bridge** | **light** )
* `RPCInfo()` -> RPC port, version, available APIs, etc.

`UserAPI`

* `AccountBalance(_acct_)` -> returns balance for given account
* `SubmitTx(_txdata_)` -> submits a transaction to the network

### Introduce `StateService`
`StateService` is responsible for fetching state relevant to a user being able to submit a transaction, such as account
balance, preparing the transaction, and propagating it via `TxSub`. **Bridge** nodes will be responsible for listening

> to `TxSub` and relaying the transactions into the Core mempool.

Author: What do you mean by "relay" them? Just listen to txSub and make sure a **Bridge** node receives them?

> to `TxSub` and relaying the transactions into the Core mempool.

Reviewer 2: [Relay](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-pubsub/blob/master/topic.go#L179). We would need this to allow light nodes not connected to a bridge node, but only to a full node to be able to send transactions.

`light -> full -> bridge` - If full does not relay, the tx would not get to the bridge.

> to `TxSub` and relaying the transactions into the Core mempool.

Reviewer 2: One more concern I have about TxSub is how light nodes would be notified back about their transaction is not included, but let's keep this as it is rn. We will come back to this anyway.

### [Data Availability Sampling during `HeaderSync`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/181)

Currently, both **light** and **full* nodes are unable to perform data availability sampling (DAS) while syncing.
They only begin sampling once the node is synced up to head of chain. 

`HeaderSync` and the `DASer` will be refactored such that the `DASer` will be able to perform sampling on past headers
as the node is syncing. To do this, the syncing algorithms in both the `DASer` and `HeaderSync` should align so that
headers received during sync will be propagated to the `DASer` for sampling via an internal pubsub.

The `DASer` will maintain a checkpoint to the last sampled header so that it can continue sampling from the last 
checkpoint on any new headers.

<hr style="border:1px solid gray"> </hr>

## Refactoring

### `HeaderService` becomes main component around which most other services are focused
Initially, we started with BlockService being the more “important” component during devnet architecture, but overlooked
some problems with regards to sync (we initially made the decision that a celestia full node would have to be started 

> together at the same time as a core node -- which is the reason for embedding the core node).

Author: Well we did initially overlook the sync component, and then added ability to sync to a remote core node (which was way better than having to shut the entire network down and restart it all at the same time).

> together at the same time as a core node -- which is the reason for embedding the core node).

Author: I'll remove the embedded node portion.

This led us to an issue where eventually we needed to connect to an already-running core node and sync from it. We were
missing a component to do that, so we implemented `HeaderExchange` over the core client (wrapping another interface we 
had previously created for BlockService called `BlockFetcher`), and we had to do this last minute b/c it wouldn’t work 
otherwise, leading to a bunch of hacks and other issues (like having to hand the celestia full node a “trusted” hash of

> a header from the already-running chain so that it can sync up to that point and start listening for new headers.

Author: Trusted hash is the trusted head hash, so we do forward sync up to that point... correct?

> a header from the already-running chain so that it can sync up to that point and start listening for new headers.

Author: Also handing the node a "trusted hash" is *kinda* hacky bc the user has to go and find the trusted hash and input it in order to start their node (which is why you made that presentation that we should hard code a couple of trusted peers and ask them for their heads instead of doing that).

> a header from the already-running chain so that it can sync up to that point and start listening for new headers.

Author: I spoke with @Wondertan about this offline, and the behaviour *as it stands at the moment* is the same for both full and light nodes (which it shouldn't be). Light nodes use the trusted hash as a jumping-off point which is fine as they do not need the full history of the chain, whereas full nodes *do* yet they use the same syncing logic (at the moment) as light nodes, which is where the confusion stems from. Regardless, this is now changed in the ADR. 

Resolving this conversation.

**Proposed new architecture**:

### [`BlockService` is only responsible for reconstructing the block from Shares handed to it by the `ShareService`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/251).
Right now, the `BlockService` is in charge of fetching new blocks from the core node, erasure coding them, generating 
DAH, generating `ExtendedHeader`, broadcasting `ExtendedHeader` to `HeaderSub` network, and storing the block data 
(after some validation checks).

Instead, we should rely on ShareService sampling to fetch us *enough* shares to reconstruct the block inside of 
`BlockService`.

### `ShareService` optimizations
* Implement parallelization for retrieving shares by namespace. This
[issue](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/184) is already being worked on.
* NMT/Shares/Namespace storage optimizations (**TODO @WONDERTAN**)

> * Pruning/GC for shares.(**TODO @WONDERTAN**)

Reviewer 2: Hmm, does it make sense for light nodes to keep shares only for headers within unbonding period and not beyond? Same for headers, a light node may simply delete all the past headers beyond unbonding period, as it does not trust them anyway.

> * Pruning/GC for shares.(**TODO @WONDERTAN**)

Reviewer 2: Technically the same is true for Full Node as they are also prone to longe-range attack(because they don't do consensus validation), but someone still have to serve all the headers, so they should keep them.

> * Pruning/GC for shares.(**TODO @WONDERTAN**)

Reviewer 2: Extracted into https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/272

### `HeaderSync` optimizations
* Implement disconnect toleration 

### Bonding period handling

> (**TODO @WONDERTAN**)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `celestia-node` is prone to the highly theoretical but still possible long-range attack. To mitigate it, we should introduce an additional `trustPeriod` variable(equal to unbonding period) which applies to headers. Suppose a Node starts with the period between subjective Header head and objective Header head being higher than unbonding period. In that case, the Node must not trust the subjective head anymore, specifically its ValidatorSet. Therefore, instead of syncing subsequent Headers on top of the untrusted subjective head, the Node should request a new objective head from the `trustedPeer` and set it as a new trusted subjective head. 
```

* Introduce a standalone **full** node and rename current full node implementation to **bridge** node. 
* Remove **dev** as a node type and make it a flag on every available node type.

### Introduce bad encoding fraud proofs
Bad encoding fraud proofs will be generated by **full** nodes inside of `ShareService`, upon reconstructing a block
via the sampling process. 

If fraud is detected, the **full** node will generate the proof and broadcast it to the `FraudSub` gossip network and
will subsequently halt all operations. If no fraud is detected, the **full** node will continue operations without 
propagating any messages to the network. Since **full** nodes reconstruct every block, they do not have to listen to 
`FraudSub` as they perform the necessary encoding checks on every block.

**Light** nodes, however, will listen to `FraudSub` for bad encoding fraud proofs. **Light** nodes will verify the 
fraud proofs against the relevant header hash to ensure that the fraud proof is valid. 
If the fraud proof is valid, the node should immediately halt all operations. If it is invalid, the node proceeds 
operations as usual. 

> Eventually, we may choose to use the reputation tracking system provided by libp2p for nodes who broadcast invalid fraud 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eventually, we may choose to use the reputation tracking system provided by [gossipsub](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.1.md#peer-scoring) for nodes who broadcast invalid fraud 
```

Or is there a more general reputation system in libp2p? If yes, please ignore this comment.

new headers.

#### Proposed new architecture: [`BlockService` is only responsible for reconstructing the block from Shares handed to it by the `ShareService`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/251).
Right now, the `BlockService` is in charge of fetching new blocks from the core node, erasure coding them, generating 
DAH, generating `ExtendedHeader`, broadcasting `ExtendedHeader` to `HeaderSub` network, and storing the block data 
(after some validation checks).

Instead, a **full** node will rely on `ShareService` sampling to fetch us *enough* shares to reconstruct the block 
inside of `BlockService`. Contrastingly, a **bridge** node will not do block reconstruction via sampling, but rather 
rely on the `header.CoreSubscriber` implementation of `header.Subscriber` for blocks. `header.CoreSubscriber` will 
handle listening for new block events from the core node via RPC, erasure code the new block, generate the 
`ExtendedHeader` and pipe the erasure coded block through to `BlockService` via an internal subscription.

### `HeaderSync` optimizations
* Implement disconnect toleration 

### Unbonding period handling

> The **light** node is prone to the highly theoretical but still possible long-range attack. To mitigate it, we should 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **light** node currently is prone to long-range attacks. To mitigate it, we should 
```

introduce an additional `trustPeriod` variable (equal to unbonding period) which applies to headers. Suppose a node 
starts with the period between subjective head and objective head being higher than the unbonding period - 
in that case, the **light** node must not trust the subjective head anymore, specifically its `ValidatorSet`. Therefore, 
instead of syncing subsequent headers on top of the untrusted subjective head, the Node should request a new objective 

> head from the `trustedPeer` and set it as a new trusted subjective head.

Reviewer: Can it be mentioned that this should essentially follow tendermint's light client's approach?

<hr style="border:1px solid gray"> </hr>

## Nice to have

### `ShareService` optimizations
* Implement parallelization for retrieving shares by namespace. This
  [issue](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/184) is already being worked on.
* NMT/Shares/Namespace storage optimizations:
  * Right now we prepend to each Share 17 additional bytes, Luckily, for each reason why the prepended bytes were added, 
  there is an alternative solution: It is possible to get NMT Node type indirectly, without serializing the type itself
  by looking at the amount of links. To recover the namespace of the erasured data, we should not encode namespaces into 
  the data itself. It is possible to get the namespace for each share encoded in inner non-leaf nodes of the NMT tree. 

> * Pruning for shares. 

Reviewer: I think another rather important nice to have not mentioned here, is that syncing past headers should request headers not only from one peer, but again following the tendermint light client security model, double-check with a randomly chosen ["witness"](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/02d456b8b8274088e8d3c6e1714263a47ffe13ac/light/client.go#L138-L141) here as well.
See: https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/02d456b8b8274088e8d3c6e1714263a47ffe13ac/light/client.go#L154-L161

> The light client maintains a simple address book containing addresses of full nodes that it can pick as primary and secondaries. To obtain a new light block, the light client first does verification with the primary, and then cross-checks the light block (and the trace of light blocks that led to it) with the secondaries using this specification.

https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/master/spec/light-client/detection/detection_003_reviewed.md#context-of-this-document

new headers.

#### Proposed new architecture: [`BlockService` is only responsible for reconstructing the block from Shares handed to it by the `ShareService`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/251).
Right now, the `BlockService` is in charge of fetching new blocks from the core node, erasure coding them, generating 
DAH, generating `ExtendedHeader`, broadcasting `ExtendedHeader` to `HeaderSub` network, and storing the block data 
(after some validation checks).

Instead, a **full** node will rely on `ShareService` sampling to fetch us *enough* shares to reconstruct the block 
inside of `BlockService`. Contrastingly, a **bridge** node will not do block reconstruction via sampling, but rather 
rely on the `header.CoreSubscriber` implementation of `header.Subscriber` for blocks. `header.CoreSubscriber` will 
handle listening for new block events from the core node via RPC, erasure code the new block, generate the 
`ExtendedHeader` and pipe the erasure coded block through to `BlockService` via an internal subscription.

### `HeaderSync` optimizations
* Implement disconnect toleration 

### Unbonding period handling

> The **light** node currently is prone to long-range attacks. To mitigate it, we should 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **light** and **full**  nodes currently are prone to long-range attacks. To mitigate it, we should 
```
Just bring everyone's attention to this. Unfortunately, the `full` node is in the same position. The only thing to mitigate that is for a full node to run the whole Tendermint consensus.
